Proposal for Vector Calling Convention (#389)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc: riscv-cc.adoc

|===
| Name    | ABI Mnemonic | Meaning                      | Preserved across calls?

| v0      |              | Argument register            | No
| v1-v7   |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*
| v8-v23  |              | Argument registers           | No

> | v24-v31 |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*

Author: It does not feel easy to understand if two convention tables are in two separate places, because the two tables are for different functions. I think it would be better to just put the two tables in this place, and then state which table applies to functions with scalable vector arguments and return values, and which table applies to the other functions. like bellow:

```adoc
.Vector register convention for functions without scalable vector arguments and return values
[%autowidth]
|===
| Name    | ABI Mnemonic | Meaning                      | Preserved across calls?

| v0-v31  |              | Temporary registers          | No
| vl      |              | Vector length                | No
| vtype   |              | Vector data type register    | No
| vxrm    |              | Vector fixed-point rounding mode register    | No
| vxsat   |              | Vector fixed-point saturation flag register  | No
|===

.Vector register convention for functions with scalable vector arguments or return values
[%autowidth]
|===
| Name    | ABI Mnemonic | Meaning                      | Preserved across calls?

| v0      |              | Argument register            | No
| v1-v7   |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*
| v8-v23  |              | Argument registers           | No
| v24-v31 |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*
| vl      |              | Vector length                | No
| vtype   |              | Vector data type register    | No
| vxrm    |              | Vector fixed-point rounding mode register    | No
| vxsat   |              | Vector fixed-point saturation flag register  | No
|===

*: Only functions using vector registers to pass arguments or return values need to preserve these registers, other functions treat these registers as temporary registers.

Please refer to the <<Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant>> section for more details about functions with scalable vector arguments or return values.
```

> | v24-v31 |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*

Reviewer: > .Vector register convention for functions with scalable vector arguments or return values

This statement seems not included fixed size vector, I would like use more neutral term here: 

Vector register convention for standard vector calling convention variant

> | v24-v31 |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*

Author: > Vector register convention for standard vector calling convention variant

Maybe `Vector register convention for functions that do not use the vector registers to pass arguments and return values` and `Vector register convention for functions that use the vector registers to pass arguments and return values` are more accurate?

> | v24-v31 |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*

Reviewer: SVE has a case is you can annotate a function with aarch64_vector_pcs[1], but no vector argument/return value, I suspect that might be useful in some scenario, but explicitly say function arg or return passed in vector reg will  forbid such scenario, that's why I would like refer `standard vector calling convention variant` instead of referring pass/return in vector regs.

[1] https://github.com/gcc-mirror/gcc/blob/master/gcc/testsuite/gcc.target/aarch64/sve/pcs/saves_2_le_wrap.c

> | v24-v31 |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes*

Author: Soga, make sense to me. A function with `#pragma omp declare simd` notate might be converted to a new function that uses the vector registers to pass arguments or return values. Therefore, these functions need to be explicitly marked when needed to indicate compliance with `the standard vector calling convention variant`.

|===
| Name    | ABI Mnemonic | Meaning                      | Preserved across calls?

| v0      |              | First vector mask argument or mask return value | No

> | v1-v31  |              | Other vector mask and data argument registers   | No

Author: Get it.

| v1-v31  |              | Other vector mask and data argument registers   | No
| vl      |              | Vector length                | No
| vtype   |              | Vector data type register    | No
| vxrm    |              | Vector fixed-point rounding mode register    | No
| vxsat   |              | Vector fixed-point saturation flag register  | No
|===

Vector registers are not used for passing arguments or return values; we
intend to define a new calling convention variant to allow that as a future

> software optimization.

Author: Get it.

> software optimization.

Author: > Vector registers are not used for passing arguments or return values; use Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant if want to passing arguments or return values in vector register.

A small question, for functions that contain vector type parameters or return values, is it necessary to follow the Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant? If so, this means that vector type arguments must be passed through vector registers or memory (if there are not enough registers). I think so, so this sentence is not needed.

> software optimization.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think it could be removed.

| vxsat   |              | Vector fixed-point saturation flag register  | No
|===

.Vector register convention for standard vector calling convention variant
[%autowidth]
|===
| Name    | ABI Mnemonic | Meaning                      | Preserved across calls?

| v0      |              | Argument register            | No
| v1-v7   |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes
| v8-v23  |              | Argument registers           | No
| v24-v31 |              | Callee-saved registers       | Yes
| vl      |              | Vector length                | No
| vtype   |              | Vector data type register    | No
| vxrm    |              | Vector fixed-point rounding mode register    | No
| vxsat   |              | Vector fixed-point saturation flag register  | No
|===

> Please refer to the <<Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant>> section for more details about standard vector calling convention variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please refer to the <<Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant>> section for 
more details about standard vector calling convention variant.
```

== Procedure Calling Convention

> This chapter defines standard calling conventions and standard calling convention variants and describes how to pass arguments and return values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter defines standard calling conventions and standard calling convention variants,
and describes how to pass arguments and return values.
```

Scalars wider than 2×XLEN bits are passed by reference and are replaced in the
argument list with the address.

> The size of the vector type is considered to be unknown. So vector type scalar always is passed by reference.

Author: Sorry, the statement is a bit wrong, it should be `scalar of vector type`.

Scalars wider than 2×XLEN bits are passed by reference and are replaced in the
argument list with the address.

The size of scalars with vector type is considered to be unknown, so these scalars always is passed by reference.

> 

Reviewer 2: Since we aren't defining any new ABIs, there is no calling convention variant where scalars of vector type are passed by reference - appearance of any scalar of vector type requires the use of the rules in the "Rules for vector arguments ..." section.

Author: Hmm, that makes sense. This rule will never be used if we mandate that arguments and return values with vector type must follow the vector calling convention. My confusion is how to pass these arguments and return values before the vector calling convention becomes standard. Or just assume that it doesn't matter until the vector calling convention is determined.

Reviewer 2: I would say that it doesn't matter because until the vector calling convention is determined, users have no expectation of ABI compatibility between compilers and compiler versions.

in a register and the remaining bits are passed on the stack. If no registers are
available, the aggregate is passed on the stack. Bits unused due to
padding, and bits past the end of an aggregate whose size in bits is not

> divisible by XLEN, are undefined. If the aggregate contains a field of vector type, it always is passed by reference.

Reviewer 2: ditto

Floating-point registers fs0-fs11 shall be preserved across procedure calls,
provided they hold values no more than ABI_FLEN bits wide.

=== Hardware Vector Calling Convention

The first named scalar argument of vector mask type use v0 to pass. Other named
scalar arguments of the same type pass like the named scalar arguments of
vector data type. See the following description about named scalar arguments
of vector data type.

Named scalar arguments of vector data type has property LMUL. If LMUL is less
than 1, treat it as 1. If it is possible to find unused registers segment
starting from v1 and the first register in segment is LMUL-aligned, use these
registers to pass the argument. Otherwise, pass through the function stack.

> Aggregates cannot pass with vector registers.

Reviewer 3: Why can't we just flatten aggregates, like in the other calling conventions?

And aren't the RVV tuple types essentially "aggregates"?

It's true that GCC and LLVM currently don't support scalable vectors in aggregates, but GCC has much of the infrastructure in place, and the LLVM folks who opposed this previously (w.r.t. SVE) aren't so active any more. So I'm optimistic we will see this as the RVV C/C++ dialect evolves. It'd be nice if our ABI didn't rule it out.

Author: Thanks for the reminder, I think it makes sense, even if there is currently no way to implement the inclusion of vector scalar type filed in struct. I will add these as soon as possible.

Author: Hi, I've added the description of the struct type pass rule, thanks.

Author: After further discussion, we currently prohibit the use of scalable vector type in struct or union in the proposal first, because LLVM has not proven whether it can be implemented. If this is possible in the future, we will add this piece. This approach does not introduce incompatibilities.

Reviewer 3: I understand the current deficiency of LLVM and I understand the task group policy, so I accept this decision. But I disagree with the comments about in/compatibilities: supporting aggregates containing vectors would require (yet) another calling convention variant.

Author: What I'm trying to say is that when we support this part, there will be no problems linking to the previous library.

Variadic vector arguments are passed by reference.

Vector mask value is rturned in the same manner as a first named argument of the
same type would be passed.

Vector data value is returnd in the same manner as a first named argument of the
same type would be passed.

> NOTE: vector mask type and data type defined https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/blob/master/rvv-intrinsic-rfc.md#type-system[here]. Data type include tuple type.

Author: Yes, the type extended by the tuple type is also included. The proposal only stipulates that the argument register allocated for the vector type is LMUL-aligned, and the number of registers occupied by the vector type itself is not fixed.

Floating-point registers fs0-fs11 shall be preserved across procedure calls,
provided they hold values no more than ABI_FLEN bits wide.

=== Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant

This section applies only to named arguments. Variadic arguments of vector type are passed by reference.

> The hardware vector calling convention adds 1 argument register for argument of vector mask type and 31 argument registers for arguments of vector data type and vector tuple type which are v0 and v1-v31, respectively. v0 is used for the first argument of vector mask type and return values of vector mask type, the rest of the arguments of mask type are treated as arguments of vector data type. v1-v31 are also used for return values of vector data type and vector tuple type.

Reviewer: ` the rest of the arguments of mask type are treated as arguments of vector data type`  -> ` the rest of the arguments of mask type are treated as arguments of vector data type with LMUL 1`

Author: Ok. In addition, is it necessary to explain LMUL and NF in this proposal, or is it assumed that the reader knows the meaning of LMUL and NF?

Reviewer: Good point, let add some comment to explain that :)

Floating-point registers fs0-fs11 shall be preserved across procedure calls,
provided they hold values no more than ABI_FLEN bits wide.

> === Hardware Vector Calling Convention

Author: Get it.

NOTE: The vector mask type, data type and tuple type are defined https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/blob/master/rvv-intrinsic-rfc.md#type-system[here].

A struct containing just one vector type value is passed as though it were a standalone vector type value.

A struct containing two vector type values is passed in vector registers, if there are suitable unused continuous vector register sets for them.

A struct containing one vector type value and one integer (or bitfield), in either order, is passed in vector registers and an integer register, provided the integer is no more than XLEN bits wide, and at least one unused continuous vector register set and at least one integer argument register are available.

A struct containing one vector type value and one floating-point real, in either order, is passed in vector registers and an floating-point register, provided the floating-point real is no more than ABI_FLEN bits wide, and at least one unused continuous vector register set and at least one floating-point argument register are available.

> A struct is not passed in the above manner, then it is passed according to the integer calling convention.

Reviewer: Plz drop the struct part first, psABI require PoC, and it's not implementable on LLVM land.

Author: Get it.

NOTE: See the Hardware Floating-point Calling Convention section for the definition of struct.

Unions are never flattened and are always passed according to the integer calling convention.

Values are returned in the same manner as the first named argument of the same type would be passed.

> If a function uses vector registers to pass arguments or return value, the function needs to be annotated with `STO_RISCV_VARIANT_CC`. See <<Dynamic Linking>> for more details.

Author: Get it.

Floating-point registers fs0-fs11 shall be preserved across procedure calls,
provided they hold values no more than ABI_FLEN bits wide.

> === Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant

Reviewer 2: The section title is contributing significantly to the confusion here.  We are NOT defining a new calling convention variant, we are making a compatible extension of the existing calling conventions to handle a new type.  We should call the section something like "Rules for vector arguments and return values in the integer calling convention and the hardware floating point calling convention" or remove the section entirely and edit the contents into the other sections.

Author: I think what you mean is that the vector calling convention is equivalent to an undefined part of an existing calling convention. For the vector type defined in the RVV Intrinsic document, it can be seamlessly added to the existing calling convention. However, this is not the case for GNU-ext vector types, which will be passed using the scalar register until there is a vector calling convention (i.e., currently), and then will need to switch to using the vector register (if the GNU-ext vector type is also included in the new calling convention). In this case calling `variant` is necessary.

Reviewer 2: If @kito-cheng's call-preserved vector register proposal is adopted then there's more of a case for describing the calling convention with call-preserved vector registers a variant.  I would still prefer to discuss and merge this PR independently of #390, since this one discusses strictly new types and doesn't require programmer-visible annotation while #390 is the opposite.

Reviewer: @sorear I think so, I would like break whole vector calling convention into 3 parts, first one is this PR which contain all scalable vector stuffs pass by vector register, and second part is the fixed size gnu extension vector and last part is the  `riscv_rvv_vector_bits` (`arm_sve_vector_bits` or `--param riscv-autovec-preference=fixed-vlmax` mode).

This section applies only to named arguments. Variadic arguments of vector type are passed by reference.

The hardware vector calling convention adds 1 argument register for vector mask type argument and 31 argument registers for vector data and tuple type argument which are v0 and v1-v31, respectively. v0 is used for the first vector mask type argument and the vector mask type return value, the rest of the mask type arguments are treated as vector data type arguments. v1-v31 are also used for the vector data and tuple type return value.

> Vector data type arguments have properties LMUL and NREGS, the current LMUL can be 1/8, 1/4, 1/2, 1, 2, 4, 8, the current NREGS can be 1, 2, 4, 8. For arguments with LMUL less than 1, their LMUL is treated as 1. The LMUL of the vector mask type argument is treated as 1. The NREGS property means the number of registers needed for this argument. For vector data type, NREGS is 1 when LMUL is less than 1, otherwise NREGS is equal to LMUL. If it is possible to find NREGS unused continuous vector register set starting from v1 and its first register is LMUL-aligned, use these registers to pass the argument. Otherwise, the argument is passed by reference.

Reviewer 2: Do vector arguments go in the lowest numbered free vector register set satisfying the criteria, the lowest numbered register set after those already used, or some other rule?

```c
void foo(vint8m2_t x, vint8m2_t y) {
    /* x is v2 because ??? */
    /* y is v1 because it's the lowest not already used by x,
       v4 because it's the lowest after x, or ??? */
}
```

Author: The process of allocation:
1. For x, LMUL=2, NREGS=2. It can find v2-v3 which are unused and LMUL-aligned from the start of v1, so allocate v2-v3 for it.
2. For y, LMUL=2, NREGS=2. It can find v4-v5  which are unused and LMUL-aligned from the start of v1, so allocate v4-v5 for it.

Reviewer: We need more document the allocation detail on the spec, and I would suggest drop the NREGS term, just using LMUL and say any fractional LMUL will treat as LMUL=1.

Reviewer 2: There was a typo, I meant y to be `vint8_t`.  I just noticed that the answer is in the top comment but it should be in the commits as well.

Author: @sorear @kito-cheng  I've re-described the register allocation rules, would it be easier to understand them?

Reviewer 2: With the new note it's clear to me, will allow @kito-cheng to resolve.

vector tuple type arguments have the same LMUL and NREGS properties as the vector data type, but also have the NF property. NREGS equals NF multiplied by LMUL, but cannot exceed 8. The process of finding the argument registers is the same as for the vector data type.

NOTE: The vector mask type, data type and tuple type are defined https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/blob/master/rvv-intrinsic-rfc.md#type-system[here].

> 

Reviewer 2: Since aggregates containing vector types were removed from the initial proposal, we should explicitly say that there is no ABI for aggregates containing vector types and passing them is illegal, so that if they are added in the future it will not be a compatibility break.

Author: Good idea, thank you.

Values are returned in the same manner as the first named argument of the same type would be passed.

If a function uses standard vector calling convention variant, the function needs to be annotated with `STO_RISCV_VARIANT_CC`. See xref:riscv-elf.adoc#dynamic-linking[Dynamic Linking] for more details.

> 

Reviewer 2: If a function has any arguments or return values passed using vector registers,

Reviewer 4: I mean, this is already defined by the existing part of the spec that introduces STO_RISCV_VARIANT_CC...

Author: > I mean, this is already defined by the existing part of the spec that introduces STO_RISCV_VARIANT_CC...

Removed this statement, thank you.

If a function takes at least one argument in scalable vector registers, or if it returns results in such registers, it must ensure that the entire contents of v1-v7 and v24-v31 are preserved across the call. In other cases it no need to preserve.

Each scalable data and tuple type has an LMUL attribute that indicates a vector register group. The value of LMUL indicates the number of vector registers in the vector register group and requires the first vector register number in the vector register group must be a multiple of it. For example, the LMUL of `vint64m8_t` is 8, so v8-v15 vector register group can be allocated to this type, but v9-v16 can not because the v9 register number is not a multiple of 8. If LMUL is less than 1, it is treated as 1. If it is a scalable mask type, its LMUL is 1.

Each scalable tuple type also has a NFIELDS attribute, which indicates how many vector register groups the type contains. Thus a scalable tuple type takes up LMUL×NFIELDS registers.

The rules for passing the scalable vector argument are as follows:

> 1. For the first scalable mask parameter, use v0 to pass it. The argument has now been allocated.

Reviewer: use v0 to pass it if that has not yet been allocated

Author: Is this condition `has not yet been allocated` redundant? Since v0 can't be in the allocated state before it.

2. For scalable data argument or rest scalable mask argument, if a vector register group can be found from v8 to v23 that has not yet been allocated and the first register number is a multiple of LMUL, then allocate the vector register group to this argument and mark these registers as allocated. Otherwise, pass it by reference. The argument has now been allocated.

> 3. For scalable tuple argument, if NFIELDS vector register groups can be found from v8 to v23 that have not yet been allocated, and the first register number is a multiple of LMUL, then allocate these vector register groups to this argument and mark these registers as allocated. Otherwise, pass it by reference. The argument has now been allocated.

Reviewer: I would like to swap 2 and 3, and saying scalable tuple type will break into (or treat as) NFIELDS-pieces scalable data argument.

This will introduce some complicated rule like partial tuple type passed in register and partial passed in memory, however my assumption is the vector register size might be large, the cost of memory traffic would be high, so introduce this can reduce that in some case, and utilize the vector arg. register.

e.g. 

`void foo (vint32m8_t a, vint32m8x2_t b)` a will passed in v8-v15 and b will passed in v16-v23 *AND* memory

Reviewer 2: My understanding is that the primary purpose of tuple types is to support the vector segment load/store instructions.  If that is correct, there's very little use for such a type split between registers and memory; does LLVM even support partially spilling a vector tuple type?  (Trying to pass one to inline asm crashes compiler explorer)

Author: For cases where there are enough registers, such as the function `void foo (vint32m1_t a, vint32m2_t b, vint32m1x2_t c)`. According to your rules, v8 is allocated to `a`, v10-v11 to `b`, and v9 and v12 to `c`. When using the `c` argument in segment store operation, it is necessary to move v9 and v12 to consecutive registers (e.g. move v9 to v13 and v12 to v14). Thus unnecessary instructions are added compared to the old rule.

Reviewer: @sorear 
> My understanding is that the primary purpose of tuple types is to support the vector segment load/store instructions. If that is correct, there's very little use for such a type split between registers and memory;

Yeah, and also @lhtin's case convince me that's unnecessary complexity. 

> does LLVM even support partially spilling a vector tuple type? (Trying to pass one to inline asm crashes compiler explorer)

Per me LLVM experience, that should be implementable since it's modeled as struct, but anyway let drop my the latest proposal.

@lhtin 
> For cases where there are enough registers, such as the function void foo (vint32m1_t a, vint32m2_t b, vint32m1x2_t c). According to your rules, v8 is allocated to a, v10-v11 to b, and v9 and v12 to c. When using the c argument in segment store operation, it is necessary to move v9 and v12 to consecutive registers (e.g. move v9 to v13 and v12 to v14). Thus unnecessary instructions are added compared to the old rule.

Thanks for the case! the case convince me that my proposal here is bad idea :)

Floating-point registers fs0-fs11 shall be preserved across procedure calls,
provided they hold values no more than ABI_FLEN bits wide.

=== Standard Vector Calling Convention Variant

> The https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec[RISC-V V Vector Extension] defines a set of thirty-two scalable vector registers, v0-v31. The https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc/blob/master/rvv-intrinsic-rfc.md#type-system[RISC-V V Vector Extension Intrinsics] defines scalable vector types which include scalable mask types, scalable data types, and scalable tuple types. A scalable vector value can be stored in vector register groups.

Reviewer: I'm a bit hesitant to use the term "scalable vector" and "scalable" in the psABI spec since neither v-spec or rvv-intrinsic-doc didn't use that, so I would like to just "vector" rather than "scalable vector" in this section.

And `vector mask type` `vector data types` for consistent with https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/pull/380/files

Author: I think the name `scalable` can use distinguishes it from the gnu-ext vector type. vector types include those defined by intrinsic doc, as well as gnu-ext vector types. But I think it's okay if there's one place where it's clear what it's referring to.

The remainder of this section applies only to named scalable vector arguments, other named arguments and return values follow the standard calling convention. Variadic scalable vector arguments are passed by reference.

> For now, scalable vector types are not allowed in struct or union.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vector types are disallowed in struct or union.
```

v0 is used to pass the first scalable mask argument to a function, and to return scalable mask result from a function. v8-v23 are used to pass scalable data arguments, scalable tuple arguments and the rest scalable mask arguments to a function, and to return scalable data and scalable tuple results from a function.

> If a function takes at least one argument in scalable vector registers, or if it returns results in such registers, it must ensure that the entire contents of v1-v7 and v24-v31 are preserved across the call. In other cases it no need to preserve.

Reviewer: Per discussion https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/pull/389#discussion_r1251421684, I suggest change to:
```suggestion
It must ensure that the entire contents of v1-v7 and v24-v31 are preserved across the call.
```

arguments, vector tuple arguments and the rest vector mask arguments to a
function, and to return vector data and vector tuple results from a function.

It must ensure that the entire contents of v1-v7 and v24-v31 are preserved
across the call.

Each vector data type and vector tuple type has an LMUL attribute that
indicates a vector register group. The value of LMUL indicates the number of
vector registers in the vector register group and requires the first vector
register number in the vector register group must be a multiple of it. For
example, the LMUL of `vint64m8_t` is 8, so v8-v15 vector register group can be
allocated to this type, but v9-v16 can not because the v9 register number is
not a multiple of 8. If LMUL is less than 1, it is treated as 1. If it is a
vector mask type, its LMUL is 1.

Each vector tuple type also has an NFIELDS attribute that indicates how many
vector register groups the type contains. Thus a vector tuple type needs to
take up LMUL×NFIELDS registers.

The rules for passing vector arguments are as follows:

1. For the first vector mask argument, use v0 to pass it. The argument has now
been allocated.

> 2. For vector data arguments or rest vector mask arguments, starting from the

Reviewer 5: Is it necessary to allocate the register in order? For example,
`func foo(vint32m8 a, vint32m1 b, vint32m8 c)`,
if we allocate in order, we can just allocate `a` to `v8-v15`, `b` to `v16` and `c` by reference,
if we would like to maximize register usage, we have to allocate `a` to `v8-v15`, `c` to `v16-v23` and `b` by reference.

Author: I had thought about this before, and I thought it would make the allocation rules very complicated (the allocation algorithm needs to choose the optimal allocation results while maintaining certainty), but I didn't see much benefit. Even these current rules are actually a little complicated, the actual user will write the interface when the function of such parameters? More discussion is welcome about it.

Reviewer 5: If we didn't sort the arguments, it's potentially violation for tuple type consecutive constraint as the example shown in [line 401](https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/pull/389/files#diff-3a934f00cffdb3e509722753126a2cf6082a7648ab3b9ca8cbb0e84f8a6a12edR401), since `c` is split into two `vint32m1_t` in backend, the normal ordered allocation would assign first `vint32m1_t` to `v9` and the second one to `v12`.

Author: > since c is split into two vint32m1_t in backend
Which backend? We treat `c` as a whole argument(not split), just like a `vint32m2_t` type, but without needing align 2.

Reviewer 5: For example, `void foo(vint32m1x2_t a) {}` is lowered to
`define void @foo(<vscale x 2 x i32> %a.coerce0, <vscale x 2 x i32> %a.coerce1) {
entry:
  ret void
}`
in LLVM.

Author: So LLVM can't allocate him as a whole argument? If this is the case, this proposal is now unimplementable for LLVM. The current specification allows a certain amount of ORDER, but not full ORDER. you can see an example of the second NOTE.

Reviewer 4: Without attempting to read all the details here:

LLVM can be made to implement whatever you want it to do (though some things are easier than others). Talking about whatever IR Clang happens to emit today and how the backend deals with that today isn't particularly meaningful.

Reviewer 5: @kito-cheng  what do you think? Do you think we should implement tuple type as a single type instead of splitting to multiple single type in LLVM IR?

v8 register, if a vector register group between v8-v23 that has not been
allocated can be found and the first register number is a multiple of LMUL,
then allocate this vector register group to the argument and mark these
registers as allocated. Otherwise, pass it by reference. The argument has now
been allocated.

> 3. For vector tuple arguments, starting from the v8 register, if NFIELDS

Reviewer 5: One question on tuple type arguments. If the `NFIELDS=2` and we only find 1 register group for it, can we pass 1 group by register and the other by reference?
Or all of the group should be passed in the same way?

Author: The current proposal chooses the second way that either both go through registers or both go through memory.

Reviewer 5: Is it better to use first approach for better register usage?

Author: This approach needs a bit of refinement before we discuss it. For example, consider a case like the function `void foo (.... , vint32m4x2_t a, vint32m2_t b, vint32m2_t c);`, suppose the first approach is used and the remaining v18-v23 registers are available for the `a`, `b`, and `c` parameters. Then part of `a` is allocated to v20-v23 (4-aligned) and the other part is passed through memory, `b` is allocated to v18-v19, and `c` is passed through memory by reference. How is the other part of a going to be passed in this case? If something like 2xXLEN's scalar argument is passed through the stack, then the part passed through v20-v23 needs to be restored to the pretend_args area, which doesn't feel like an added benefit. Also, part of `a` is passed via stack and `b` is in registers, a situation I'm not sure can be implemented in the compiler, I feel like it can only be passed by reference and not by stack. But if it is passed by reference, it feels strange that this reference only references part of `a` argument.

Reviewer 5: Got it, after discussing with @kito-cheng , we thought that we can implement the original(non-partial) approach. Then we can find another possibility for increasing the register usage, thanks!

Reviewer 5: One other question, are the tuple type's `NFIELD` of register groups necessary to be consecutive?
I think we just need ensure all the groups are passed in a same way right?

Author: Please see if this previous discussion(https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/pull/389#discussion_r1246717449) answers your question, thanks.

Reviewer 5: I see, it should better be consecutive since the instructions such as segment load/store need them to be, thanks!

consecutive vector register groups between v8-v23 that have not been allocated
can be found and the first register number is a multiple of LMUL, then allocate
these vector register groups to the argument and mark these registers as

> allocated. Otherwise, pass it by reference. The argument has now been allocated.

Reviewer 5: Could you please add a note for example for `tuple type registers should be consecutive` constraint?
e.g. void foo(vint32m1_t a0, vint32m2_t a1, vint32m1x2_t a2)
a0 -> v8
a1 -> v10-v11
a2 -> v12-v13
but not 
a0 -> v8
a1 -> v10-v11
a2.0 -> v9
a2.1 -> v12
where `a2.0` is the first NFIELD of `a2` and `a2.1` is the second NFIELD of `a2`.

Author: Sure, how about this NOTE?:
```
NOTE: The registers assigned to the tuple vector data argument must be consecutive.
For example, for the function `void foo(vint32m1_t a, vint32m2_t b, vint32m1x2_t c)`,
v8 will be allocated to `a`, v10-v11 will be allocated to `b`,
v12-v13 instead of v9 and v12 will be allocated to `c`.
```

Reviewer 5: Great! Thanks~

consecutive. For example, for the function
`void foo(vint32m1_t a, vint32m2_t b, vint32m1x2_t c)`, v8 will be allocated
to `a`, v10-v11 will be allocated to `b`, v12-v13 instead of v9 and v12 will
beallocated to `c`.

NOTE: It should be stressed that the search for the appropriate vector register
groups starts at v8 each time and does not start at the next register after the
registers are allocated for the previous vector argument. Therefore, it is
possible that the vector register number allocated to a vector argument can be
less than the vector register number allocated to previous vector arguments.
For example, for the function
`void foo (vint32m1_t a, vint32m2_t b, vint32m1_t c)`, according to the rules
of allocation, v8 will be allocated to `a`, v10-v11 will be allocated to `b`
and v9 will be allocated to `c`. This approach allows more vector registers to
be allocated to arguments in some cases.

Vector values are returned in the same manner as the first named argument of
the same type would be passed.

Vector types are disallowed in struct or union.

Vector arguments and return values are disallowed to pass to an unprototyped
function.

> 

Reviewer 4: This should not have been done like this. STO_RISCV_VARIANT_CC is an ELF-specific thing (a flag in ElfXX_Sym's st_other) detailed in riscv-elf.adoc, but riscv-cc.adoc is a separate document that describes the calling convention independently from the underlying file format (and could be used by Windows or macOS if they choose to adopt RISC-V, which use PE/COFF and Mach-O respectively).
